.TH STASIS 1 "February 2026" "stasis" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
stasis \- idle manager with ordered, per-step timers and profile overlays
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B stasis
.RI [ options ] " [command]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B stasis
is a user-session idle manager that runs an ordered plan of actions (steps)
after periods of inactivity.

Steps are evaluated strictly in file order and use per-step sequential timers:
each step's timeout counts from the moment the previous enabled step fires
(not from last user activity).

Stasis supports:
.IP \(bu 2
A debounce window before step timeouts (optional).
.IP \(bu 2
Per-step notifications before a step fires (optional).
.IP \(bu 2
Lock-aware behavior: if already locked, Stasis advances past the lock step.
.IP \(bu 2
Plan sources for desktops and laptops (AC vs battery).
.IP \(bu 2
Profiles that overlay or replace configuration.
.IP \(bu 2
Manual pause/resume and inhibition controls.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config " " \fIFILE\fR
Use \fIFILE\fR as the configuration file.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Enable verbose logging.
.TP
.B \-\-no-console
Disable console logging/output.
.TP
.B \-\-timestamps
Include timestamps in console output.

.SH COMMANDS
If no command is provided, \fBstasis\fR runs the idle manager.

.TP
.B reload
Reload the configuration without restarting Stasis.

.TP
.BR pause " " [\fIfor\fR " " \fIDURATION\fR] | [\fIuntil\fR " " \fITIME\fR]
Pause idle timers.

With no arguments, pauses indefinitely until \fBstasis resume\fR.

With \fBfor\fR, schedules an automatic resume after a duration.

With \fBuntil\fR, schedules an automatic resume at the next occurrence of a local time.

Duration format:
.IP \(bu 2
A sequence of \fB<number><unit>\fR parts, e.g. \fB1h30m\fR, \fB5m\fR, \fB10s\fR, \fB250ms\fR, \fB1d2h3m4s\fR.
.IP \(bu 2
Units: \fBms\fR, \fBs\fR, \fBm\fR, \fBh\fR, \fBd\fR.

Time format (\fBuntil\fR):
.IP \(bu 2
24-hour: \fB13:30\fR, \fB0:05\fR.
.IP \(bu 2
12-hour with am/pm: \fB1:30pm\fR, \fB1:30 pm\fR, \fB1pm\fR, \fB1 pm\fR.

Notes:
.IP \(bu 2
\fBstasis pause\fR always pauses immediately first; \fBfor/until\fR only adds an auto-resume.
.IP \(bu 2
New pause/resume requests invalidate older scheduled auto-resumes.

.TP
.B resume
Resume idle timers after a manual pause.
Any pending scheduled auto-resume is invalidated.

.TP
.BR list " " actions | profiles
List information from the running daemon.

\fBactions\fR shows the currently effective plan (active profile + power source).

\fBprofiles\fR shows all configured profile names you can switch to.

If no argument is provided, or \fBhelp\fR/\fB-h\fR/\fB--help\fR is used, prints usage.

.TP
.BR trigger " " \fISTEP\fR
Manually trigger an idle step by name.

Normalization is case-insensitive:
spaces and tabs are removed and underscores become dashes.

Aliases:
.IP \(bu 2
\fBlock\fR and \fBlockscreen\fR map to \fBlock-screen\fR.

Special value:
.IP \(bu 2
\fBall\fR triggers all enabled, non-instant steps in the effective plan, skipping the lock step if already locked.

Custom steps can be triggered by their name (normalized) and also by
\fBcustom:\fR or \fBcustom-\fR prefixes.

.TP
.B toggle-inhibit
Toggle manual idle inhibition. When inhibited, timers are paused.

.TP
.B stop
Stop all running Stasis instances.

.TP
.BR info " " [\-\-json]
Display current session information.
With \fB--json\fR, output machine-readable JSON.

.TP
.BR dump " " [\fIN\fR]
Print the last \fIN\fR lines of the Stasis log (default: 100, max: 2000).

.TP
.BR profile " " \fINAME\fR | none
Switch the active profile used for config selection.
Only a single token is accepted.

\fBnone\fR clears the active profile overlay (uses base config only).

If no argument is provided, or \fBhelp\fR/\fB-h\fR/\fB--help\fR is used, prints usage.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.local/state/stasis/stasis.log
Default log file location.
.TP
.I ~/.config/stasis/stasis.rune
Typical configuration location (packaging may choose another default).

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 2
Command-line usage error.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Run with a specific config:
.B stasis --config ~/.config/stasis/stasis.rune
.TP
List effective actions:
.B stasis list actions
.TP
List profiles:
.B stasis list profiles
.TP
Switch profile:
.B stasis profile work
.TP
Clear profile overlay:
.B stasis profile none
.TP
Pause indefinitely:
.B stasis pause
.TP
Pause for 1 hour 30 minutes:
.B stasis pause for 1h30m
.TP
Pause until 1:30pm local time:
.B stasis pause until 1:30pm
.TP
Resume:
.B stasis resume
.TP
Trigger lock step:
.B stasis trigger lock-screen
.TP
Dump last 200 log lines:
.B stasis dump 200

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR stasis (5),
.BR loginctl (1),
.BR systemctl (1)

.SH AUTHOR
Dustin Pilgrim
.SH LICENSE
MIT
