.TH STASIS 5 "February 2026" "stasis" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
stasis \- configuration format for the Stasis idle manager
.SH SYNOPSIS
Configuration file written in \fBrune-cfg\fR.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Stasis reads a single configuration file containing:
.IP \(bu 2
A base \fBdefault\fR configuration.
.IP \(bu 2
Optional profile blocks (e.g. \fBgaming\fR, \fBwork\fR).
.PP
Configuration defines global knobs (inhibitors, debounce, notifications) and
an ordered plan of steps. Steps are executed strictly in file order.

Stasis supports plan sources:
.IP \(bu 2
Desktop plan (from step blocks directly under \fBdefault:\fR).
.IP \(bu 2
Laptop AC plan (from \fBdefault:\fR \-> \fBac:\fR).
.IP \(bu 2
Laptop battery plan (from \fBdefault:\fR \-> \fBbattery:\fR).

Profiles may override globals and steps using \fBoverlay\fR or \fBfresh\fR mode.

.SH GLOBAL KEYS
Global keys live directly under a config block (typically \fBdefault:\fR or a profile).

.TP
.B enable_loginctl true|false
Controls whether Stasis integrates with logind/session state to \fItrack\fR
lock/unlock and related session state for internal scheduling and scripting semantics.
.PP
When enabled, Stasis uses logind-derived state as its source of truth for whether the
session is locked (and for deferring resume behavior until unlock).
.PP
\fBImportant:\fR this does \fInot\fR lock your screen. Locking the screen is always
done by your configured \fBlock_screen\fR step \fBcommand\fR (e.g. \fBhyprlock\fR) if you set one.

.TP
.B pre_suspend_command \fICOMMAND\fR | None
Optional command run immediately before a suspend step fires. If set, it runs
before the suspend step command (or before the built-in suspend action).

.TP
.B enable_dbus_inhibit true|false
Controls whether Stasis listens to D-Bus inhibit signals on the session bus.
When enabled (default), D-Bus inhibit state can hold Stasis in waiting-for-idle
until inhibit clears.
.PP
This only controls session D-Bus inhibit monitoring. It does not affect
\fBmonitor_media\fR audio/media detection or \fBmedia_blacklist\fR filtering.
.PP
Use this for browser and other app inhibit requests carried over session D-Bus.
Browser/media-tab inhibit is handled here, not by \fBmonitor_media\fR.
.PP
\fBImportant:\fR this requires the compositor to be started in a real D-Bus session
(for example \fBniri-session\fR, \fBdbus-run-session\fR, or compositor-specific
session launcher guidance).

.TP
.B monitor_media true|false
If true, non-browser media playback can inhibit idle evaluation.
.PP
This setting is separate from D-Bus inhibit monitoring. Browser media inhibit
is controlled by \fBenable_dbus_inhibit\fR.

.TP
.B ignore_remote_media true|false
If true, remote players are ignored for media inhibit.

.TP
.B media_blacklist [ \fIPATTERN...\fR ]
List of patterns to ignore for media inhibit (case-insensitive).
Patterns may be literal strings or regular expressions.

.TP
.B debounce_seconds \fIN\fR
Debounce window in seconds. When non-zero, Stasis adds this delay before each
step timeout is considered due for the current idle episode.

.TP
.B notify_on_unpause true|false
If true, when resuming from an IPC pause expiry (e.g. \fBstasis pause for 5m\fR),
Stasis emits a notification using the message attached to the expiry event.

.TP
.B notify_before_action true|false
If true, per-step notifications are enabled for steps that define a
\fBnotification\fR string.

.TP
.B inhibit_apps [ \fIPATTERN...\fR ]
List of patterns that inhibit idle behavior while active (case-insensitive).
Regular expressions are allowed.

.TP
.B lid_close_action \fICOMMAND\fR | ""
Optional command run immediately when the laptop lid closes.
Setting this to an empty string (\fB""\fR) clears any inherited lid-close action.

.TP
.B lid_open_action \fICOMMAND\fR | ""
Optional command run immediately when the laptop lid opens.
Setting this to an empty string (\fB""\fR) clears any inherited lid-open action.

.SH STEPS AND PLANS
A plan is a sequence of step blocks. Stasis executes steps strictly in the order
they appear in the effective configuration.

A step is considered \fIenabled\fR if it has a \fBcommand\fR.

A step with \fBtimeout 0\fR is an \fIinstant one-shot\fR and fires immediately once
when a plan starts (for example, on startup or when switching power source).

.SS Common step keys
Each step block supports:

.TP
.B timeout \fISECONDS\fR
Seconds relative to the previous enabled step firing. \fB0\fR means instant one-shot.

.TP
.B command \fICOMMAND\fR
Command to run when the step fires.

.TP
.B resume_command \fICOMMAND\fR
Optional command to run on user activity after this step has fired.
Resume commands can be deferred until unlock if the session is locked.

.TP
.B notification \fISTRING\fR
Optional notification message emitted before firing this step (only if
\fBnotify_before_action true\fR is set globally).

.TP
.B notify_seconds_before \fISECONDS\fR
Seconds to wait after sending the notification before firing the command.
Only applies when \fBnotification\fR is set.

.SS Lock step behavior (\fBlock_screen\fR)
A \fBlock_screen\fR step behaves like a normal step, with extra semantics:

.IP \(bu 2
If \fBenable_loginctl true\fR, Stasis can track whether the session is currently locked.
.IP \(bu 2
Lock behavior is lock-centric: if the session is already locked when the lock step
would run, Stasis advances past it without re-running it.

.SS Suspend behavior
A \fBsuspend\fR step may omit \fBcommand\fR. In that case Stasis performs its built-in
suspend action. If \fBpre_suspend_command\fR is set, it runs first.

.SS Custom steps
Arbitrary step blocks are allowed. Internally they are treated as custom plan steps.

Custom step triggering:
custom steps can be triggered by their normalized name, and also by
\fBcustom:\fR or \fBcustom-\fR prefixes.

.SH DESKTOP VS LAPTOP PLAN SOURCES
Stasis selects a plan source:

.TP
.B Desktop
Uses step blocks directly under \fBdefault:\fR (including custom steps).

.TP
.B AC
On laptops, uses step blocks under \fBdefault:\fR \-> \fBac:\fR.

.TP
.B Battery
On laptops, uses step blocks under \fBdefault:\fR \-> \fBbattery:\fR.

If the selected plan source is empty, Stasis falls back to the desktop plan.
If still empty (older configs), it falls back to the legacy default order:
startup \-> brightness \-> lock_screen \-> dpms \-> suspend.

.SH PROFILES
Profiles are top-level blocks alongside \fBdefault\fR.

.TP
.B mode "overlay" | "fresh"
Merge strategy.

.IP \(bu 2
\fBoverlay\fR: starts from the active base (desktop plan OR laptop ac/battery plan)
and overrides globals and steps it defines. For plans, if a step kind already exists
it is replaced; otherwise it is appended.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBfresh\fR: starts from a fully disabled config; only fields explicitly set in the
profile apply.

Selecting profile name \fBnone\fR via \fBstasis profile none\fR clears profile overlay.

.SH NOTIFICATION AND TIMING SEMANTICS
For a non-instant step, Stasis computes a due time as:
.PP
\fBdue = step_base + debounce_seconds + step.timeout\fR
.PP
If \fBnotify_before_action\fR is true and the step defines \fBnotification\fR:

.IP \(bu 2
Stasis sends the notification when the due time is reached.
.IP \(bu 2
Then it waits \fBnotify_seconds_before\fR seconds after notification before firing the step.
.PP
If the step has no notification (or notifications are disabled), it fires when due.

Per-step timers are sequential: after a step fires, the base time resets and the
next step's timeout begins from that moment.

.SH PAUSING AND RESUMING
Manual pause is controlled by \fBstasis pause\fR and \fBstasis resume\fR.

.TP
.B Indefinite pause
\fBstasis pause\fR with no arguments pauses until \fBstasis resume\fR is run.

.TP
.B Scheduled resume
\fBstasis pause for DURATION\fR or \fBstasis pause until TIME\fR schedules an automatic
resume. New pause/resume requests invalidate older scheduled resumes.

.TP
.B Unpause notification
If \fBnotify_on_unpause\fR is enabled, when a scheduled pause expires Stasis emits a
notification using the message associated with the pause expiry event, such as:
.IP \(bu 2
\fBResume idle manager after <duration> pause\fR
.IP \(bu 2
\fBResume idle manager: pause-until time reached (<time>)\fR

.SH INHIBITION
Stasis pauses timers while inhibitors are active (apps and/or media) or while the
system is paused (sleep/lid events).

Lid close/open pause/resume plan timers regardless of any configured lid actions.
If \fBlid_close_action\fR/\fBlid_open_action\fR are set, their commands run immediately
on the respective lid event.

When resuming from a pause, internal timestamps are adjusted so timers do not
advance during the paused interval.

.SH PATTERNS
Lists such as \fBinhibit_apps\fR and \fBmedia_blacklist\fR accept:

.TP
.B Literal strings
Matched case-insensitively as substring contains.
.TP
.B Regular expressions
Provided in rune-cfg regex syntax (e.g. \fBr".*\\.exe"\fR). Regex evaluation is applied
to a normalized lowercase haystack.

.SH EXAMPLE
A minimal desktop example:

.nf
default:
  enable_loginctl true
  enable_dbus_inhibit true
  debounce_seconds 5
  notify_before_action true

  lock_screen:
    timeout 300
    command "hyprlock"
    notification "Locking in 10s"
    notify_seconds_before 10
  end

  suspend:
    timeout 1800
    command "systemctl suspend"
  end
end
.fi

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR stasis (1),
.BR loginctl (1),
.BR systemctl (1)

.SH AUTHOR
Dustin Pilgrim
.SH LICENSE
MIT
